==================
Intel速 ISPC for Xe
==================

The Intel速 Implicit SPMD Program Compiler (Intel速 ISPC) is actively developed
to support latest Intel GPUs. The compilation for a GPU is pretty
straightforward from the user's point of view, but managing the execution of
code on a GPU may add complexity. You can use a low-level API `oneAPI Level Zero
<https://spec.oneapi.com/level-zero/latest/index.html>`_ to manage available GPU
devices, memory transfers between CPU and GPU, code execution, and
synchronization. Another possibility is to use `ISPC Run Time (ISPCRT)`_, which
is part of the ISPC package, to manage that complexity and create a unified
abstraction for executing tasks on CPU and GPU.

Contents:

* `Using The ISPC Compiler`_

  + `Environment`_
  + `Basic Command-line Options`_

* `ISPC Run Time (ISPCRT)`_

  + `ISPCRT Objects`_
  + `Execution Model`_
  + `Configuration`_

* `Compiling and Running Simple ISPC Program`_

* `Language Limitations and Known Issues`_

* `Performance`_

  + `Performance Guide for GPU Programming`_
  + `Tools for Performance Analysis`_

+ `Interoperability`_

* `FAQ`_

  + `How to Get an Assembly File from SPIR-V?`_
  + `How to Debug on GPU?`_

Using The ISPC Compiler
=======================

The output from ``ispc`` for Xe targets is SPIR-V file by default. It is used
when either ``gen9`` or ``xe`` target is selected:

.. code-block:: console

   ispc foo.ispc --target=gen9-x8 -o foo.spv

The SPIR-V file is consumed by the runtime for further compilation and execution
on GPU.

You can also generate an L0 binary using ``--emit-zebin`` flag. Please note that
the SPIR-V format is currently more stable, but feel free to experiment with the
L0 binary format.

Environment
-----------

``Intel速 ISPC for Xe`` is supported on Linux for quite a while (recommended and
tested Linux distribution is Ubuntu 22.04) and it's got Windows support since
v1.16.0.

You need to have a system with ``Intel(R) Processor Graphics Gen9`` or later.

For the execution of ISPC programs on GPU, please install `Intel(R) Graphics
Compute Runtime <https://github.com/intel/compute-runtime/releases>`_ on Linux
or `Intel(R) Graphics Driver for Windows
<https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/download-center/home.html>`_ on
Windows.  Additionally you need `Level Zero Loader
<https://github.com/oneapi-src/level-zero/releases>`_.

To use ISPC Run Time for CPU on Linux you need to have ``Intel(R) oneAPI Threading Basic Blocks``
installed on your system. Consult your Linux distribution documentation for the
installation of TBB runtime instructions.


Basic Command-line Options
--------------------------

A bunch of new targets were introduced for GPU support: ``gen9-x8``,
``gen9-x16``, ``xelp-x8``, ``xelp-x16``, ``xehpg-x8``, ``xehpg-x16``,
``xehpc-x16`` and ``xehpc-x32``.

If the ``-o`` flag is given, ``ispc`` will generate a SPIR-V output file.
Optionally you can use ``--emit-spirv`` flag:

.. code-block:: console

   ispc --target=gen9-x8 --emit-spirv foo.ispc -o foo.spv

To generate L0 binary, use ``--emit-zebin`` flag. When you use L0 binary you may
want to pass some additional options to the vector backend. You can do this
using ``--vc-options`` flag.

When targeting Xe targets, ``xe64`` architecture must be used. It corresponds to
64-bit host and has 64-bit pointer size. We don't support 32-bit pointers for Xe
targets.

To generate LLVM bitcode, use the ``--emit-llvm`` flag.  To generate LLVM
bitcode in textual form, use the ``--emit-llvm-text`` flag.

Optimizations are on by default; they can be turned off with ``-O0``.

Generating a text assembly file using ``--emit-asm`` is not supported yet.  See
`How to Get an Assembly File from SPIR-V?`_ section about how to get the
assembly from SPIR-V file.

There is a new ``link`` mode in ``ispc`` allowing to link several LLVM bitcode
or SPIR-V files to selected output format: LLVM bitcode (default), LLVM bitcode
text or SPIR-V.

Link two SPIR-V files to LLVM BC output:

.. code-block:: console

    ispc link test_a.spv test_b.spv --emit-llvm -o test.bc

Link LLVM bitcode files to SPIR-V output:

.. code-block:: console

    ispc link test_a.bc test_b.bc --emit-spirv -o test.spv


ISPC Run Time (ISPCRT)
======================

``ISPC Run Time (ISPCRT)`` unifies execution models for CPU and GPU targets. It
is a high-level abstraction on the top of `oneAPI Level Zero
<https://spec.oneapi.com/level-zero/latest/index.html>`_. You can continue using
ISPC for CPU without this runtime and alternatively use pure ``oneAPI Level
Zero`` for GPU. However, we strongly encourage you to try ``ISPCRT`` and give us
feedback!  The ``ISPCRT`` provides C and C++ APIs which are documented in the
header files (see ``ispcrt.h`` and ``ispcrt.hpp``) and distributed as a library
that you can link to.  Examples in ``ispc/examples/xpu`` directory demonstrate
how to use this API to run SPMD programs on CPU or GPU. You can see how to use
``oneAPI Level Zero`` runtime in ``sgemm`` example.  It is also possible to run
ISPC kernels and DPCPP kernels written with ``oneAPI DPC++ Compiler`` using
``oneAPI Level Zero`` from the same process and share data between them. Try
``Simple-DPCPP`` and ``Pipeline-DPCPP`` examples to learn more about this
possibility. Please keep in mind though that this feature is experimental.

ISPCRT Objects
--------------

The ``ISPC Run Time`` uses the following abstractions to manage code execution:

* ``Device`` - represents a CPU or a GPU that can execute SPMD program and has
  some operational memory available. The user may select a particular type of
  device (CPU or GPU) or allow the runtime to decide which device will be used.

* ``Memory view`` - represents data that need to be accessed by different
  ``devices``. For example, input data for code running on GPU must be firstly
  prepared by a CPU in its memory, then transferred to a GPU memory to perform
  computations on. ``Memory view`` can also represent memory allocated using a
  Unified Shared Memory mechanism provided by ``oneAPI Level Zero``. Pointers to
  data allocated in the USM are valid both on the host and on the device.  Also,
  there is no need to explicitly handle data movement between the CPU and the
  GPU. This is handled automatically by the ``oneAPI Level Zero`` runtime.

* ``Task queue`` - each ``device`` has a task (command) queue and executes
  commands from it. Commands may be executed simultaneously. To prevent that
  one should explicitly insert barriers in places where synchronization is
  required. ``Task queue`` ``sync`` method stops the host thread until GPU
  computation completed. For asynchronous computation, one should utilize
  ``CommandQueue`` and ``CommandList`` objects.

* ``CommandQueue`` - represents a logical input stream to the device and
  directly maps to L0 command queues.

* ``CommandList`` - represents commands to be executed on a command queue. It
  can be created by calling ``createCommandList`` method of ``CommandQueue``
  object. Synchronization between all commands in list has to be done
  explicitly by putting barriers if needed. Fine-grained synchronization via
  ``Events`` are not supported yet.

* ``Fence`` - is a synchronization primitive to communicate to the host that
  command list execution has completed. ``Fence`` is created upon command list
  submission. It can be waited synchronously (``sync``) and asynchronously
  (periodically checking ``status``). Fence has two states
  ``ISPCRT_FENCE_UNSIGNALED`` and ``ISPCRT_FENCE_SIGNALED`` returned by
  ``status`` method.

* ``Barrier`` - synchronization primitive that can be inserted into a ``task
  queue`` to make sure that all tasks previously inserted into this queue have
  completed execution. It is not needed to include ``barrier`` between memory
  copy and kernel execution. All memory scheduled to be copied before the kernel
  execution will complete before the kernel start.  This is implemented by
  ``ISPC Runtime`` using finer grain mechanisms than a barrier and is more
  efficient.

* ``Module`` - represents a set of ``kernels`` that are compiled together and
  thus can share some common code. In this sense, SPIR-V file produced by
  ``ispc`` is a ``module`` for the ``ISPCRT``. User can provide additional
  options for module compilation using ``ISPCRTModuleOptions``. Currently
  ``ISPCRTModuleOptions`` structure allows to set stack size for VC backend
  which is used to compile SPIR-V.  The set of supported options will be
  extended as needed.

* ``Kernel`` - is a function that is an entry point to a ``module`` and can be
  called by inserting kernel execution command into a ``task queue``. A kernel
  has one parameter - a pointer to a structure of actual kernel parameters.

* ``Future`` - can be treated as a promise that at some point ``kernel``
  execution connected to this object will be completed and the object will
  become valid.  ``Futures`` are returned when a ``kernel`` invocation is
  inserted into a ``task queue``. When the ``task queue`` is executed on a
  device, the ``future`` object becomes valid and can be used to retrieve
  information about the ``kernel`` execution.

* ``Array`` - Conveniently wraps up memory view objects and allows for easy
  allocation of memory on the device or in the Unified Shared Memory (USM).  The
  ISPCRT also provides an example allocator that makes it even more simple to
  allocate data in the USM and a SharedVector class that serves the same
  purpose. See XPU examples and documentation for more details.

All ``ISPCRT`` objects support reference counting, which means that it is not
necessary to perform detailed memory management. The objects will be released
once they are not used.

Execution Model
---------------

The idea of `ISPC tasks
<https://ispc.github.io/ispc.html#task-parallelism-launch-and-sync-statements>`_
has been extended to support the execution of kernels on a GPU. Each kernel
execution command inserted into a task queue is parametrized with the number of
tasks (threads) that should be launched on a GPU. Each task must decide on which
part of the problem it should work, exactly the same as it happens in the CPU
case. Within tasks, the program executes in SPMD manner (again the regular ISPC
execution model is copied). All built-in variables used for that purpose (such
as ``taskIndex``, ``taskCount``, ``programIndex``, ``programCount``) are
available for use on GPU.

Configuration
-------------

The behavior of ``ISPCRT`` can be configured using the following environment
variables:

* ``ISPCRT_USE_ZEBIN`` - when defined as ``1`` forces to use experimental L0
  native binary format.  Unlike SPIR-V files, zebin files are not portable
  between different GPU types.

* ``ISPCRT_IGC_OPTIONS`` - ``ISPCRT`` is using an Intel速 Graphics Compiler
  (IGC) to produce binary code that can be executed on the GPU. ``ISPCRT``
  allows for passing certain options to the IGC via ``ISPCRT_IGC_OPTIONS``
  variable.  The content of this variable should be prefixed with ``+`` or ``=``
  sign.  ``+`` means that the content of the variable should be added to the
  default IGC options already passsed by the ``ISPCRT``, while ``=`` tells the
  ``ISPCRT`` to replace the default options with the content of the environment
  variable.

* ``ISPCRT_GPU_DRIVER`` - if more than one supported GPU is present in the
  system, they may be managed by several GPU drivers. The user can select 
  the GPU driver to be used by the ``ISPCRT`` using ``ISPCRT_GPU_DRIVER``
  variable. It should be set to a corresponding driver number as enumerated
  by the Level Zero runtime. For example, in a system with two GPU drivers present, 
  the variable can be set to ``0`` or ``1``.

* ``ISPCRT_GPU_DEVICE`` - if more than one supported GPU is present in the
  system, the user can select the GPU device to be used by the ``ISPCRT`` using
  ``ISPCRT_GPU_DEVICE`` variable. It should be set to a number of a device as
  enumerated by the Level Zero runtime. For example, in a system with two GPUs
  present, the variable can be set to ``0`` or ``1``.

* ``ISPCRT_MAX_KERNEL_LAUNCHES`` - there is a limit of the maximum number of
  enqueued kernel launches in a given task queue. If the limit is reached,
  sync() method needs to be called to submit the queue for execution. The limit
  is currently set to 100000, but can be lowered (for example for testing) using
  this environmental variable.  Please note that the limit cannot be set to more
  than 100000. If a greater value is provided, the ``ISPCRT`` will set the limit
  to the default value and display a warning message.

* ``ISPCRT_VERBOSE`` - when defined as ``1`` enables verbose output.

* ``ISPCRT_MEM_POOL`` - when defined as ``1`` enables usage of memory pool for
  memory view allocations that created with appropriate shared memory allocation
  hints.

* ``ISCPRT_MEM_POOL_MIN_CHUNK_POW2`` - provide the power of 2 for minimal chunk
  size that can be allocated without rounding up to the nearest power of 2.

* ``ISCPRT_MEM_POOL_MAX_CHUNK_POW2`` - provide the power of 2 for maximal memory
  allocation that can fit into the memory pool.

Also you can use ``ISPCRTModuleOptions`` structure to pass specific options to
GPU module.  Currently we support only one setting - ``stackSize`` which
determines the stack size in VC backend. The default value is 8192.

Compiling and Running Simple ISPC Program
=========================================

The directory ``examples/xpu/simple`` in the ``ispc`` distribution includes a
simple example of how to use ``ispc`` with a short C++ program for CPU and GPU
targets with ISPC Run Time. See the file ``simple.ispc`` in that directory (also
reproduced here.)

.. code-block:: cpp

  struct Parameters {
    float *vin;
    float *vout;
    int    count;
  };

  task void simple_ispc(void *uniform _p) {
   Parameters *uniform p = (Parameters * uniform) _p;

      foreach (index = 0 ... p->count) {
        // Load the appropriate input value for this program instance.
        float v = p->vin[index];

          // Do an arbitrary little computation, but at least make the
          // computation dependent on the value being processed
          if (v < 3.)
            v = v * v;
          else
            v = sqrt(v);

          // And write the result to the output array.
          p->vout[index] = v;
      }
   }

  #include "ispcrt.isph"
  DEFINE_CPU_ENTRY_POINT(simple_ispc)

There are several differences in comparison with CPU-only version of this
example located in ``examples/simple``. The first thing to notice in this
program is the usage of the ``task`` keyword in the function definition instead
of ``export``; this indicates that this function is a ``kernel`` so it can be
called from the host.

The second thing to notice is ``DEFINE_CPU_ENTRY_POINT`` which tells ``ISPCRT``
what function is an entry point for CPU. If you look into the definition of
``DEFINE_CPU_ENTRY_POINT``, it is just simple ``launch`` call:

.. code-block:: cpp

  launch[dim0, dim1, dim2] fcn_name(parameters);

It is used to set up thread space for CPU and GPU targets in a seamless way in
host code. If you don't plan to use ``ISPCRT`` on CPU, you don't need to use
``DEFINE_CPU_ENTRY_POINT`` in ISPC program. Otherwise, you should have
``DEFINE_CPU_ENTRY_POINT`` for each function you plan to call from ``ISPCRT``.

The final thing to notice is that instead of using real parameters for the
kernel ``void * uniform`` is used and later it is cast to ``struct Parameters``.
This approach is used to set up parameters for the kernel in a seamless way for
CPU and GPU on the host side.

Now let's look into ``simple.cpp``. It executes the ISPC kernel on CPU or GPU
depending on an input parameter. The device type is managed by
``ISPCRTDeviceType`` which can be set to ``ISPCRT_DEVICE_TYPE_CPU``,
``ISPCRT_DEVICE_TYPE_GPU`` or ``ISPCRT_DEVICE_TYPE_AUTO`` (tries to use GPU, but
fallback to CPU if no GPUs found).

The program starts with including ``ISPCRT`` header:

.. code-block:: cpp

  #include "ispcrt.hpp"

After that ``ISPCRT`` device is created:

.. code-block:: cpp

  ispcrt::Device device(device_type)

Then we're setting up parameters for ISPC kernel:

.. code-block:: cpp

    // Setup input array
    ispcrt::Array<float> vin_dev(device, vin);

    // Setup output array
    ispcrt::Array<float> vout_dev(device, vout);

    // Setup parameters structure
    Parameters p;

    p.vin = vin_dev.devicePtr();
    p.vout = vout_dev.devicePtr();
    p.count = SIZE;

    auto p_dev = ispcrt::Array<Parameters>(device, p);

Notice that all reference types like arrays and structures should be wrapped up
into ``ispcrt::Array`` for correct passing to ISPC kernel.

Then we set up module and kernel to execute:

.. code-block:: cpp

    ispcrt::Module module(device, "xe_simple");
    ispcrt::Kernel kernel(device, module, "simple_ispc");

The name of the module must correspond to the name of output from ISPC
compilation without extension. So in this example ``simple.ispc`` will be
compiled to ``xe_simple.spv`` for GPU and to ``libxe_simple.so`` for CPU so we
use ``xe_simple`` as the module name.  The name of the kernel is just the name
of the required ``task`` function from the ISPC kernel.

The rest of the program creates ``ispcrt::TaskQueue``, fills it with required
steps and executes it:

.. code-block:: cpp

    ispcrt::TaskQueue queue(device);

    // ispcrt::Array objects which used as inputs for ISPC kernel should be
    // explicitly copied to device from host
    queue.copyToDevice(p_dev);
    queue.copyToDevice(vin_dev);

    // Launch the kernel on the device using 1 thread
    queue.launch(kernel, p_dev, 1);

    // ispcrt::Array objects which used as outputs of ISPC kernel should be
    // explicitly copied to host from device
    queue.copyToHost(vout_dev);

    // Execute queue and sync
    queue.sync();


To build and run examples go to ``examples/xpu`` and create ``build`` folder.
Run ``cmake -DISPC_EXECUTABLE=<path_to_ispc_binary>
-Dispcrt_DIR=<path_to_ispcrt_cmake> ../`` from ``build`` folder. Or add path to
``ispc`` to your PATH and just run ``cmake ../``. On Windows you also need to
pass ``-DLEVEL_ZERO_ROOT=<path_lo_level_zero>`` with PATH to ``oneAPI Level
Zero`` on the system. Build examples using ``make`` or using ``Visual Studio``
solution.  Go to ``simple`` folder and see what files were generated:

* ``xe_simple.spv`` contains SPIR-V representation. This file is passed by
  ``ISPCRT`` to ``Intel(R) Graphics Compute Runtime`` for execution on GPU.

* ``libxe_simple.so`` on Linux / ``xe_simple.dll`` on Windows incorporates
  object files produced from ISPC kernel for different targets (you can find
  them in ``local_ispc`` subfolder). This library is loaded from host
  application ``host_simple`` and is used for execution on CPU.

* ``simple_ispc_<target>.h`` files include the declaration for the C-callable
  functions. They are not really used and produced just for the reference.

* ``host_simple`` is the main executable. When it runs, it generates the
  expected output:

.. code-block:: console

    Executed on: Auto
    0: simple(0.000000) = 0.000000
    1: simple(1.000000) = 1.000000
    2: simple(2.000000) = 4.000000
    3: simple(3.000000) = 1.732051
    4: simple(4.000000) = 2.000000
    ...

To set up all compilation/link commands in your application we strongly
recommend using ``add_ispc_kernel`` CMake function from CMake module included
into ISPC distribution package.

So the complete ``CMakeFile.txt`` to build ``simple`` example extracted from
ISPC build system is the following:

.. code-block:: cmake

  cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.14)

  project(simple)
  find_package(ispcrt REQUIRED)
  add_executable(host_simple simple.cpp)
  add_ispc_kernel(xe_simple simple.ispc "")
  target_link_libraries(host_simple PRIVATE ispcrt::ispcrt)


And you can configure and build it using:

.. code-block:: console

  cmake ../ && make


You can also run separate compilation commands to achieve the same result.  Here
are example commands for Linux:

* Compile ISPC kernel for GPU:

  .. code-block:: console

    ispc -I /home/ispc_package/include/ispcrt -DISPC_GPU --target=gen9-x8 --woff
    -o /home/ispc_package/examples/xpu/simple/xe_simple.spv
    /home/ispc_package/examples/xpu/simple/simple.ispc

* Compile ISPC kernel for CPU:

  .. code-block:: console

    ispc -I /home/ispc_package/include/ispcrt --arch=x86-64
    --target=sse4-i32x4,avx1-i32x8,avx2-i32x8,avx512knl-x16,avx512skx-x16 --woff
    --pic --opt=disable-assertions -h
    /home/ispc_package/examples/xpu/simple/simple_ispc.h -o
    /home/ispc_package/examples/xpu/simple/simple.dev.o
    /home/ispc_package/examples/xpu/simple/simple.ispc

* Produce a library from object files:

  .. code-block:: console

    /usr/bin/c++ -fPIC -shared -Wl,-soname,libxe_simple.so -o libxe_simple.so
    simple.dev*.o

* Compile and link host code:

  .. code-block:: console

    /usr/bin/c++ -DISPCRT -isystem /home/ispc_package/include/ispcrt -fPIE -o
    /home/ispc_package/examples/xpu/simple/host_simple
    /home/ispc_package/examples/xpu/simple/simple.cpp -lispcrt
    -L/home/ispc_package/lib -Wl,-rpath,/home/ispc_package/lib

By default, examples use SPIR-V format. You can try them with L0 binary format:

  .. code-block:: console

    cd examples/xpu/build
    cmake -DISPC_XE_FORMAT=zebin ../ && make
    export ISPCRT_USE_ZEBIN=1
    cd simple && ./host_simple --gpu

Language Limitations and Known Issues
=====================================

Below is the list of known limitations of ``Intel速 ISPC for Xe``:

* Floating point computations are not guaranteed to be bit-reproducible between
  CPU and GPU. Specifically this true for math library functions. Please
  consider it when designing your algorithms.  * ``alloca`` with non-constant
  parameter is not supported yet.  * Global variables are "kernel-local". Unlike
  on CPU, the value of global variable on GPU will not be kept between multiple
  launches.


There are several features that we do not plan to implement for GPU:

* ``launch`` and ``sync`` keywords are not supported for GPU in ISPC program
  since kernel execution is managed in the host code now.

* ``new`` and ``delete`` keywords are not expected to be supported in ISPC
  program for Xe target. We expect all memory to be set up on the host side.

* ``export`` functions must return ``void`` for Xe targets.


Performance
===========

The performance of ``Intel速 ISPC for Xe`` was significantly improved in this
release but still has room for improvements and we're working hard to make it
better for the next release. Here are our results for ``mandelbrot`` which were
obtained on Intel(R) Core(TM) i9-9900K CPU @ 3.60GHz with Intel(R) Gen9 HD
Graphics (max compute units 24):

* @time of CPU run:			[9.285] milliseconds
* @time of GPU run:			[10.886] milliseconds
* @time of serial run:			[569] milliseconds

Talking about real-world workloads, ISPC provides a way to write a program that
has good hardware utilization, but resulting performance depends a lot on many
other factors, including proper data set partitioning and memory management.

Performance Guide for GPU Programming
----------------------------------------

There are several rules for GPU programming which can bring you better
performance.

**Reduce register pressure**

The first guidance is to reduce number of local variables. All variables are
stored in GPU registers, and in the case when number of variables exceeds the
number of registers, time-costly ``register spill`` occurs.

For example, Intel(R) Gen9 register file size is 128x8x32bit. Each 32-bit
varying value takes 8x32bit in SIMD-8, and 16x32bit in SIMD-16.

To reduce number of local variables you can follow these simple rules:

* Use uniform instead of varyings wherever it is possible. This practice is good
  for both CPU and GPU but on GPU it is essential.

  .. code-block:: cpp

    // Good example
    for (uniform int j = 0; j < 3; j++) {
        do_something();
    }

  .. code-block:: cpp

    // Bad example
    for (int j = 0; j < 3; j++) {
        do_something();
    }


* Avoid nested code with a lot of local variables. It is more effective to split
  kernel into stages with separate variable scopes.

* Avoid returning complex structures from functions. Instead of operation that
  may need work on structure copy, consider to use reference or pointer. We're
  working to make such optimization automatically for future release:

  .. code-block:: cpp

    // Instead of this:
    struct ExampleStructure {
      //...
    }

    ExampleStructure createExampleStructure() {
      ExampleStructure retVal;
      //... initialize
      return retVal;
    }

    int test() {
      ExampleStructure s;
      s = createExampleStructure();
    }

  .. code-block:: cpp

    // Consider using pointer:
    struct ExampleStructure {
      //...
    }

    void initExampleStructure(ExampleStructure* init) {
      //... initialize
    }

    int test() {
      ExampleStructure s;
      initExampleStructure( &s );
    }


* Avoid recursion.

* Use SIMD-8 where it is impossible to fit in the available register number.  If
  you see the warning message below during runtime, consider compiling your code
  for SIMD-8 target (``--target=gen9-x8``).

  .. code-block:: console

    Spill memory used = 32 bytes for kernel kernel_name___vyi


**Code Branching**

The second set of rules is related to code branching.

* Use ``select`` instead of branching:

  .. code-block:: cpp

    if (x > 0)
      a = x;
    else
      a = 7;


  .. code-block:: cpp

    // May be implemented without branch:
    a = (x > 0)? x : 7;


  When using ``select``, try to simplify it as much as possible:

  .. code-block:: cpp

    // Not optimized version:
    varying int K;
    uniform bool Constant;
    ...
    return bConstant == true ? inParam[0] : InParam[K];


  .. code-block:: cpp

    // Optimized version
    return InParam[bConstant == true ? 0 : K];

* Keep branches as small as possible. Common operations should be moved outside
  the branch.  In case when large code branches are necessary, consider changing
  your algorithm to group data processed by one task to follow the same path in
  the branch.

  .. code-block:: cpp

    // Both branches execute memory access to 'array'. In the case of split branch between
    // different lanes, two memory access instructions would be executed.
    if (x > 0)
      a = array[x];
    else
      a = array[0];


  .. code-block:: cpp

    // Instead move common part outside of the branch:
    int i;
    if (x > 0)
      i = x;
    else
      i = 0;
    a = array[i];


  Similar situation with loops:

  .. code-block:: cpp

    // Good example
    uniform int j;
    foreach (i = 0 ... WIDTH) {
      p->output[i + WIDTH * taskIndex] = 0;
      int temp = p->output[i + WIDTH * taskIndex];
      for (j = 0; j < DEPTH; j++) {
        temp += N;
        temp += M;
      }
      p->output[i + WIDTH * taskIndex] = temp;
    }

  .. code-block:: cpp

    // Bad example
    foreach (i = 0 ... WIDTH) {
      p->output[i + WIDTH * taskIndex] = 0;
      for (int j = 0; j < DEPTH; j++) {
        p->output[i + WIDTH * taskIndex] += N;
        p->output[i + WIDTH * taskIndex] += M;
      }
    }

**Memory Operations**

Remember that memory operations on GPU are expensive. We do not support dynamic
memory allocations in kernel code for GPU so use fixed-size buffers preallocated
by the host.

We have several memory optimizations for GPU like gather/scatter coalescing.
However current implementation covers only limited number of cases and we expect
to improve it for the next release.

Tools for Performance Analysis
------------------------------

To analyze performance of your program on Intel GPU we recommend the following
tools:

* `GTPin
  <https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/tool/gtpin.html>`_
  dynamic binary instrumentation command line framework for profiling a code
  running on Xe Execution Units.


* `Profiling Tools Interfaces for GPU
  <https://github.com/intel/pti-gpu>`_
  a bunch of useful tracing and instrumentation tools including ``ze_tracer`` that allows
  to analyze performance of ``Level Zero`` calls which is the base of ``ISPC Runtime``.


* `Intel(R) VTune Profiler
  <https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/oneapi/vtune-profiler.html#gs.jxstae>`_
  a performance analysis tool for different hardware targets (CPU, GPU, FPGA) and OS platforms (Linux,
  Windows etc.).

Note, that most of these tools report SIMD width for ISPC kernels as 1. However,
it actually means that ISPC kernel may have "any" SIMD width. VC backend can
optimize some instructions to wider SIMD width than was requested by ISPC
``--target`` option.


Interoperability
================

ISPC experimentally supports interoperability with `Explicit SIMD SYCL*
Extension (ESIMD)
<https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/oneapi-dpcpp-cpp-compiler-dev-guide-and-reference/top/optimization-and-programming-guide/vectorization/explicit-vector-programming/explicit-simd-sycl-extension.html>`_.

You can call ``ESIMD`` function from ``ISPC`` kernel and vice versa. To
experiment with this feature, please include ``interop.cmake`` to your
CMakeLists.txt and use ``add_ispc_kernel`` and ``link_ispc_esimd`` functions.
See ``simple-esimd`` example as a reference.

Another experimental ISPC capability is interoperability with `Intel(R) oneAPI
DPC++`. You can call SYCL/DPC++ device functions from ISPC kernel using
`invoke_sycl
<https://github.com/ispc/ispc/blob/main/docs/design/invoke_sycl.rst>`_ construct
and call ISPC functions from SYCL kernel using `invoke_simd
<https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/1df003896532b3aa4454ea5c061eaf9b25ada045/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_invoke_simd.asciidoc>`_
construct.

To call SYCL/DPC++ function from ISPC you should declare it as `extern "SYCL"`
and specify `__regcall` calling convention. And then call it using
`invoke_sycl`:

.. code-block:: cpp

  extern "SYCL" __regcall int sycl_func(uniform float arr[], uniform int factor);

  task void ispc_task(uniform float arr[], uniform int factor) {
    int result = invoke_sycl(sycl_func, arr, factor);
    ...
  }


FAQ
====

How to Get an Assembly File from SPIR-V?
----------------------------------------

Use ``ocloc`` tool installed as part of intel-ocloc package:

.. code-block:: console

  // Create binary first
  ocloc compile -file file.spv -spirv_input -options "-vc-codegen" -device <name>

.. code-block:: console

  // Then disassemble it
  ocloc disasm -file file_Gen9core.bin -device <name> -dump <FOLDER_TO_DUMP>

You will get ``.asm`` files for each kernel in <FOLDER_TO_DUMP>.

To get more information from VC backend like vISA files, options used etc,
try to set one of `IGC configuration flags <https://github.com/intel/intel-graphics-compiler/blob/master/documentation/configuration_flags.md>`_.
For example to enable IGC shader dumps in shell:

.. code-block:: console

  export IGC_ShaderDumpEnable=1

How to Debug on GPU?
----------------------------------------

To debug your application, you can use oneAPI Debugger as described here: `Get
Started with GDB* for oneAPI on Linux* OS Host
<https://software.intel.com/get-started-with-debugging-dpcpp-linux>`_.  Debugger
support is quite limited at this time but you can set breakpoints in kernel
code, do step-by-step execution and print variables.
